content: draft: Add attested build environment track (#1115)
slsa-framework/slsa: docs/spec/draft/attested-build-env-levels.md

| Build executor | The platform-provided program dedicated to executing the tenant’s build definition, i.e., running the build, within the build image. The build executor must be included in the build image's measurement.
| Build dispatch | The process of assigning a tenant's build to a pre-deployed build environment on a hosted build platform.
| Compute platform | The compute system and infrastructure, i.e., the host system (hypervisor and/or OS) and hardware, underlying a build platform. In practice, the compute platform and the build platform may be managed by the same or distinct organizations.
| Boot process | In the context of builds, the process of loading and executing the layers of firmware and software needed to start up a build environmenton the build platform.
| Measurement | The cryptographic hash of some system state in the build environment, including software binaries, configuration, or initialized run-time data. Software layers that are commonly measured include the bootloader, kernel, and kernel cmdline.

TODO: Disambiguate similar terms (e.g., image, build job, build runner)

## Environment levels

> The lowest level only requires SLSA Build L2 (or higher) Provenance to exist

Reviewer: nit: environment Level 1 seems to only require SLSA Build L1.

I can see the advantage of making L1 require SLSA Build L2 (but that might also be confusing. :)).

Author: With the split of build image producer and build platform, this does actually become L1 :) Hopefully that's slightly less confusing.

for the build image, while higher levels provide increasing auditability of
the build environment's properties and integrity of the generated provenance
attestations. The highest levels introduce further requirements for hardware-
assisted hardening aimed at reducing the trusted computing base of a build.

The primary purpose of the Environment track is to enable [auditing] that a
build was run in the expected compute environment. The build platform and
producers can check attestations generated by the build platform against the
expected properties for a given build environment. This enables any party to
detect several classes of supply chain threats originating in the build
environment [TODO: Link here].

As in the Build track, the exact implementation of this track is determined
by the build platform provider, whether they are a commercial CI/CD service,
or enterprise organization. While this track describes

> general [TODO: minimum requirements], this track does not dictate the

Reviewer 2: Whereas the track does not dictate the implementation-specific details, is there going to be a co-developed reference implementation of such formats/technologies to help folks build the analogy?

Author: Absolutely. We've been prototyping this here: https://github.com/chkimes/image-attestation

### Environment L0: No guarantees

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

No requirements---L0 represents the lack of any sort of build environment provenance.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

Development or test builds of software that are built and run on the same
machine, such as unit tests.

<dt>Requirements<dd>

n/a

<dt>Benefits<dd>

n/a

</dl>
</section>

<section id="environment-l1">

### Environment L1: Signed build image provenance exists

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

The build image (i.e., VM or container image) used to instantiate the build
environment has SLSA provenance showing how the image was built.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

Build platforms and organizations wanting to ensure a baseline level of
integrity for build environments at the time of build image generation.

<dt>Software Producer Requirements<dd>

-   MUST run builds using a build image that was built by a hosted build
    platform that meets Environment L1 requirements.

-   SHOULD verify the build image's SLSA Build provenance for the selected
    build image, and distribute evidence of the verification to consumers
    (e.g., using a [VSA])

<dt>Build Platform Requirements<dd>

> -   MUST automatially generate and distribute SLSA [Build L1] or higher

Reviewer: Can you clarify what you mean by 'distribute'?  Provenance has a lot of metadata in it and some business might be nervous about publishing the actual build provenance.  However they'd likely be totally fine with publishing VSAs for those images that show they were verified.

Author: Fair point. Something that we haven't clearly expressed yet is that for higher levels, we have an expectation that the build platform will verify the Provenance and other attestations for the build images before taking certain actions. I'll amend L1 to support VSAs or full SLSA Provenance, as long as there's evidence about the build image provenance.

    Provenance for its supplied build images (i.e., VM or container images).

-   The initial state of the build environment's root storage volume
    MUST be integrity measured and signed.

> -   MUST execute builds on infrastructure that meets SLSA [Build L2].

Reviewer: What is the difference between the "supplied build images" and the infrastructure itself being Build L2?  I suppose it might be that "all the other software in the service is Build L2"?

Author: Yeah, this one has been tricky for us to articulate. Here's what we're trying to tease out. The build platform has some separate (internal) build process for the build images they supply to their users (e.g., GHA runner images), so the platform is essentially acting as a software producer. So for the VM images, we're saying that their SLSA Build Provenance needs to be at least Build L1. At the same time, since tenants will be running builds using these VM images on the hosted build platform, this implies that the build should produce at least Build L2 Provenance for any artifacts built on it.

So, put differently, we're trying to explicitly codify both the "hosted build platform" requirement as well as the need to collect SLSA Provenance for the VM/container images that that platform puts out there to run builds. 

A couple options I'm considering to address this confusion could be 1) SLSA Provenance for build images should also start at Build L2, so the VM images and artifacts built through the hosted platform have the same provenance level, or 2) we focus only on the "platform as a producer" aspect in this track, and say upfront that this track applies to Build L2 or L3 build platforms. I'm leaning towards option 2 because our intent is mainly to bolster the integrity guarantees for artifacts built in attested compute environments. WDYT?

Reviewer: Do you think it might help if we considered the producer of the build images as potentially distinct from the build platform itself?  Would that help make the language more clear?

Then a) "the components of build platform must be SLSA Build Level 2+" and b) "images used to run user provided build processes must be Build Level X+, regardless of who produced them".  'b' seems important because surely users will want to bring their own image sometimes?

I could also imagine removing 'b' entirely from the track, and instead handling that as some sort of extension of the build track itself or however [the transitivity problem](https://slsa.dev/spec/v1.0/faq#q-why-is-slsa-not-transitive) is solved.

Author: That's an interesting suggestion, thanks! I think that's already sort of where I was heading with my option 2 above, but I think it makes sense to more cleanly separate the two roles. The only part that's still trickier in my mind is disentangling the build image from the broader build environment once it's running on the platform, e.g. waiting in a runner pool to be dispatched, but I'll give this framing a try.

Reviewer: Oh something else to consider is that "components of the build platform" might wind up being _very large_ in a SaaS environment.  So it might help to be quite explicit about what is and is not in scope.

Author: I made some changes, PTAL!

<dt>Benefits<dd>

-   Provides evidence that a build image provided by a hosted build platform
    was built from the advertised source and build process.

</dl>

</section>
<section id="environment-l2">

### Environment L2: Attested build environment instantiation

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

> The deployed build environment is integrity measured and authenticated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The deployed build environment is integrity-measured and authenticated
```

Author: This was been revised in a later commit.

prior to giving access to the tenant, attesting to the initial state of the
environment.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

> Organizations wanting to ensure that a specific build is running

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Organizations wanting to ensure that an attestation policy–approved build is running
```

Author: This was revised in a later commit.

in the expected build environment.

> All of [Environment L1], plus:

Reviewer: nit: I think some of these requirements are duplicated from L1.  I can also see why we wouldn't focus on removing the duplication _now_ and would wait until it's closer to done.

Author: Yeah, we're mostly being extra explicit here. FWIW, I pretty much copied the build track levels file, which also has a lot of this duplication :)

Reviewer: Ha yeah.  Let me resolve this and we can leave it be for now.

<dt>Software Producer Requirements<dd>

-   MUST run builds in a build environment on a hosted build platform that
    meets Environment L2 requirements.

-   SHOULD verify the build image's Build SLSA provenance for the selected
    build image, and distribute evidence of the verification to consumers
    (e.g., using a [VSA])

<dt>Build Platform Requirements<dd>

-   MUST automatially generate and distribute SLSA [Build L2] or higher
    Provenance for its supplied build images (i.e., VM or container images).

-   The boot process of each build environment MUST be cryptographically measured
    and signed.

-   MUST distribute the boot and root storage attestations to allow for

>     independent verification.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this part ought to be required. The boot is measured and authenticated before giving access to the tenant, so perhaps we need only for the build agent to use credentials that root back to the attestation server, and that the certificate binds the agent to an immutable label for the policy the environment was evaluated under. If the build image has a unique name (such as a CoBOM tag UUID), then that could be included as well.

Author: I think you were looking at an older commit, we've revised this requirement so that it's no longer required.

> -   MUST uniquely bind a build image to a build environment instance.

Reviewer 2: As in a build environment can only be identified as a uniquely identified single build image? What if there are two copies of the image with the same measurements but different endorsers? I'm not sure what "uniquely bind" means.

Author: This is an old requirement we took out in a more recent commit. The way GHA operates today is that each VM is assigned a authentication token/ID. So, the idea here was to bind that ID to the build image via an integrity measurement when the VM first starts up, so that you could validate later that a particular build job ran inside of the intended VM.

Again, we took out this specific piece, because it's strictly implementation-specific, and to simplify the requirements of L2. Now, we only require that the build _job_ ID be bound to the build image (as we were discussing above).

-   MUST uniquely and immutably bind an instance of a build to its build
    environment.

-   MUST execute builds in an environment that meets SLSA [Build L3].

<dt>Benefits<dd>

-   Provides evidence that a build environment deployed by a hosted build
    platform was initialized from the expected build image.

</dl>

</section>
<section id="environment-l3">

### Environment L3: Hardware-authenticated build environment
TODO

</section>
<section id="environment-l4">

### Environment L4: Encrypted build environment

TODO

</section>

<!-- Link definitions -->

[Build L1]: levels.md#build-l1
[Build L2]: levels.md#build-l2
[Build L3]: levels.md#build-l3
[Environment L0]: #environment-l0
[Environment L1]: #environment-l1
[Environment L2]: #environment-l2
[Environment L3]: #environment-l3
[Environment L4]: #environment-l4

> [future versions]: future-directions.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[VSA]: verification_summary.md
[future versions]: future-directions.md
```

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

The build image (i.e., VM or container image) used to instantiate the build
environment has SLSA provenance showing how the image was built.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

Build platforms and organizations wanting to ensure a baseline level of
integrity for build environments at the time of build image distrbution.

<dt>Requirements<dd>

-   Build Image Producer:
    -   MUST automatically generate SLSA [Build L2] or higher
    Provenance for created build images (i.e., VM or container images).
    -   MUST allow independent automatic verification of a build image's SLSA
    Provenance. If the build image artifact cannot be published, for example
    due to intellectual property concerns, an attestation asserting the
    expected hash value of the build image MUST be generated and distributed
    instead (e.g., using [SCAI] or a [Release Attestation]). If the full
    Provenance document cannot be disclosed, a [VSA] asserting the build
    image's SLSA Provenance MUST be distributed instead.

-   Build Platform:
    -   MUST meet SLSA [Build L2] requirements.
    -   Prior to the instantiation of a new build environment, the SLSA

>     Provenance for the selected build image MUST be automatically verified.

Reviewer 3: > MUST be automatically verified.
If it must be, do we have to say what about the image is verified? 
Just the VSA's "build level 2" claim about the build image?

Author: Currently we say that it's the SLSA Provenance what needs to be verified, i.e. it's signature + contents. You're right though, that it could be the VSA if the build image Provenance isn't published. I'm tracking this change in #1196

    A signed attestation to the result of the SLSA Provenance verification
    MUST be generated and distributed (e.g., via a [VSA]).

<dt>Benefits<dd>

> Provides evidence that a build image was built from the advertised

Reviewer 3: is it also the case that we're including this build image as one of the "components" or dependencies of any artifacts built using the image? 
It seems to me that the answer should be "yes", but just checking!

Author: Agreed, the answer should be yes. I'm tracking this in #1195

The Build Environment track expands upon the [build model] by explicitily
separating the *build image* and *compute platform* from the abstract build
environment and build platform.

A typical build environment will go through the following lifecycle:

1.  *Build image creation*: A build image producer creates different build
    images through dedicated build process. For the SLSA Environment track,
    the build image producer outputs provenance describing this process.
2.  *Build environment deployment*: The hosted build platform calls into the
    *host interface* to deploy a new build environment from a given build
    image on the underlying compute platform.
    For the SLSA Environment track, the hosted build platform attests to the
    *measurement* of the environment's *initial state* during its boot
    process.
3.  *Build dispatch*: When the tenant dispatches a new build, the hosted
    build platform assigns the build to a deployed build environment. For
    the SLSA Environment track, the build platform attests to the binding
    between a build environment and *build ID*.
4.  *Build execution*: Finally, the *build executor* running within the

> environment executes the tenant's build definition.

Reviewer 4: Nit but the indentation is missing on this line 😄

attestation formats, the type of technologies used to meet L3/4 requirements,
how attestations are distributed, how build environments are identified, and
what happens on failure.

<section id="environment-l0">

### BuildEnv L0: No guarantees

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

No requirements---L0 represents the lack of any sort of build environment
provenance.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

Development or test builds of software that are built and run on a local
machine, such as unit tests.

<dt>Requirements<dd>

n/a

<dt>Benefits<dd>

n/a

</dl>
</section>

<section id="buildenv-l1">

### BuildEnv L1: Build image provenance exists

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

The build image (i.e., VM or container image) used to instantiate the build
environment has SLSA provenance showing how the image was built.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

Build platforms and organizations wanting to ensure a baseline level of
integrity for build environments at the time of build image distrbution.

<dt>Requirements<dd>

-   Build Image Producer:
    -   MUST automatially generate SLSA [Build L1] or higher
    Provenance for created build images (i.e., VM or container images).

>     -   MUST allow independent automatic verification of a build image's SLSA

Author: Interesting, this is definitely a different scenario. I think the way to handle this is for the build image producer to separately put out an explicit attestation that hash X corresponds to a certain build image. We can then articulate this in the spec as an additional requirement like "The build image producer MUST distribute sufficient information about the build image artifact to allow for verification of its provenance, either in the form of the artifact itself or an immutable identifier (e.g., an attestation to its hash)." WDYT?

>     -   MUST allow independent automatic verification of a build image's SLSA

Author: I'd made some changes to explicitly incorporate this scenario. PTAL!

    Provenance. If the full Provenance document cannot be distributed, for
    example due to intellectual property concerns, a [VSA] asserting the
    build image's SLSA Provenance MUST be distributed instead.

-   Build Platform:

>     -   MUST meet SLSA [Build L2] requirements.

Reviewer 5: Why did you choose to have build image producer and build platform requirements differ with respect to the SLSA Build level? If they differ, then the overall security of the system ultimately degrades to the lowest SLSA level in my opinion. Given the diff between Build L1 and Build L2 is primarily signed provenance, could we bump up the Build Image Producer requirement to Build L2? (And similarly, for BuildEnv L2 as well, could both be Build L3?)

Author: This is something we've gone back and forth on, and we originally had the requirement to start at Build L3, but got some pushback about how that could set the bar too high for BuildEnv L1. We've also heard some confusion/concerns around the dependency on the build track in the buildEnv track. So the current choice to lower the requirement down to Build L1 for BuildEnv L1 was mostly to make the barrier to entry for the build image producer lower. Ultimately, I agree with you that starting at Build L2 provenance for BuildEnv L1 images makes more sense from an integrity standpoint, but I also think you raise a broader question about the transitivity of SLSA levels.

Author: I reconsidered this comment, and I actually think that the argument that the security (and therefore SLSA level) of the system degrades to the lowest level isn't really accurate in this case. This track intends to build upon the integrity of the Build track because all of the requirements stated here are needed in addition to the basic Build L2 requirements in the platform. The said, there's still a reason to bump the Provenance level at L1, but it's because the focus of L2 needs to be about attesting to the "deployment chain".

    -   Prior to deployment of a new build environment, the SLSA Provenance
    for the selected build image MUST be automatically verified.

<dt>Benefits<dd>

Provides evidence that a build image was built from the advertised
source and build process.

</dl>

</section>
<section id="buildenv-l2">

### BuildEnv L2: Attested build environment instantiation

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

> The build environment is measured and authenticated prior to dispatching

Author: Thanks for catching this.

All of [BuildEnv L1], plus:

-   Build Image Producer:
    -   Build images MUST be created via a SLSA [Build L2] or higher build
    process.
    -   MUST add support in the build image to:
        -   Automatically check build image components against their
        reference values during build environment startup.
        In VM-based images, this can be achieved by enabling a [trusted boot]
        process. In container-based build images, a dedicated program MUST be
        used to perform these checks.[^1]
        -   Automatically generate and distribute a signed attestation that
        the initial state of a given build environment instance has been
        verified against the corresponding build image, incl. its SLSA
        Provenance (e.g., using [SCAI] or a [VSA]).
    -   MUST automatically generate and distribute signed reference values
    for the following build image components: bootloader or equivalent,
    guest kernel, build platform client, build executor, and root filesystem.
    Additional build image components whose initial state is to be checked
    MAY be also measured.

-   Build Platform Requirements:
    -   MUST meet SLSA [Build L3] requirements.

>     -   Prior to deployment of a new build environment, a signed attestation

Reviewer 6: How this is different from L1 which states that `Prior to deployment of a new build environment, the SLSA Provenance for the selected build image MUST be automatically verified.` Does it add a "distribution" requirement or there is more to it?

Author: At L2, the intent is to add the requirement to generate and distribute an attestation for the verification, while in L1, it's sufficient to have the verification, but it's not required to attest to this step. I agree the difference isn't clear enough right now. Maybe it makes more sense to remove the verification requirement from L1 since there's no evidence that the build platform perform it anyway?

    into the *host interface* to create a new instance of a build environment
    from a given build image. The *build agent* begins to wait for an incoming
    build dispatch. For the SLSA Environment track, the host interface in the
    compute platform attests to the integrity of the environment's *initial
    state* during its boot process.
3.  *Build dispatch*: When the tenant dispatches a new build, the hosted
    build platform assigns the build to a created build environment.
    For the SLSA Environment track, the build platform
    attests to the binding between a build environment and *build ID*.
4.  *Build execution*: Finally, the *build executor* running within the
    environment executes the tenant's build definition.

### Definitions

The Build Environment track specifies the following supply chain components
and roles:

| Primary Term | Description
| --- | ---
| Build ID | An immutable identifier assigned uniquely to a specific execution of a tenant's build. In practice, the build ID may be a cryptographic key or other unique and immutable identfier (e.g., a UUID) associated with the build execution.

> | Build image | The template for a build environment, such as a VM or container image. Individual components of a build image include the bootable storage volume containing the build executor, a dedicated build agent, and pre-installed guest OS and packages.

Reviewer 7: When a container image is used as build environment, in practice those container images are executed on a VM which gets created using a VM image. In that scenario, does the requirements documented here for build image would apply for both the host VM image and container image?

> | Build image | The template for a build environment, such as a VM or container image. Individual components of a build image include the bootable storage volume containing the build executor, a dedicated build agent, and pre-installed guest OS and packages.

Author: Yes, we're not currently covering builds that are distributed in any way, we have a big TODO for this. I opened #1150 to have the discussion specifically about multiple container images.

> | Build image | The template for a build environment, such as a VM or container image. Individual components of a build image include the bootable storage volume containing the build executor, a dedicated build agent, and pre-installed guest OS and packages.

Author: Good question. I've actually seen cases in which the containers may _not_ be run inside of VMs, hence the current wording. I agree the current spec is ambiguous about the case you describe. I'll open an issue to address the question of container-in-VMs in the spec.

> | Build image | The template for a build environment, such as a VM or container image. Individual components of a build image include the bootable storage volume containing the build executor, a dedicated build agent, and pre-installed guest OS and packages.

Author: See #1151

> | Build image | The template for a build environment, such as a VM or container image. Individual components of a build image include the bootable storage volume containing the build executor, a dedicated build agent, and pre-installed guest OS and packages.

Author: We've been going back and forth on what the best term is for the "storage volume" that covers both the container and VM use cases (there's an [open issue](#1107) for this discussion). For now, I _think_ we've landed on "root filesystem", as you noted we're using below, and it seems I missed to update this section. I'm going to make a note of your other comments in that issue.

You raise a very valid point re: the volume that contains the build executor and build agents. For now, at L2 we're requiring that those components be measured (and their measurements checked against their reference values ofc), but we aren't assuming that they be part of the bootable volume or even root fs.

> | Build image | The template for a build environment, such as a VM or container image. Individual components of a build image include the bootable storage volume containing the build executor, a dedicated build agent, and pre-installed guest OS and packages.

Reviewer 6: Great question. It depends on how we draw the boundaries of the build environment. Speaking about CloudBuild do we stop at the build executor and treat all individual steps (including the docker images) as a tenant context? Or we measure them as the part of Build environment?

Ultimately CloudBuild runs in an environment that uses different kind of builders for each step. We can say that this _is_ the build environment and individual steps are the payload that may use builders that run things inside a Docker container or in a separate virtual machine or elsewhere. And those builders may in turn spin up other builders. Where do we stop?

I think the scope of this track is to focus on the top level environment, i.e. effectively measure CloudBuild, because as it was said in the beginning of this document we measure the Build Platform. Technically individual builders can also be treated as build environment providers and hence this track could be applied to them as well.

Perhaps it could be summarize with this analogy of nested environments. Practically this track could be applied at any nested level, at least for L1. L2 and L3 get more complicated because  the more we go deeper into the nesting levels the larger "build platform" surface becomes.
```
[ top level environment [docker run [docker in docker run [...]]]]

```

> | Build image | The template for a build environment, such as a VM or container image. Individual components of a build image include the bootable storage volume containing the build executor, a dedicated build agent, and pre-installed guest OS and packages.

Author: Tracking this in #1170.

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

The build image (i.e., VM or container image) used to instantiate the build
environment has SLSA provenance showing how the image was built.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

Build platforms and organizations wanting to ensure a baseline level of
integrity for build environments at the time of build image distrbution.

<dt>Requirements<dd>

-   Build Image Producer:
    -   MUST automatically generate SLSA [Build L2] or higher
    Provenance for created build images (i.e., VM or container images).
    -   MUST allow independent automatic verification of a build image's SLSA
    Provenance. If the build image artifact cannot be published, for example
    due to intellectual property concerns, an attestation asserting the
    expected hash value of the build image MUST be generated and distributed
    instead (e.g., using [SCAI] or a [Release Attestation]). If the full
    Provenance document cannot be disclosed, a [VSA] asserting the build
    image's SLSA Provenance MUST be distributed instead.

-   Build Platform:
    -   MUST meet SLSA [Build L2] requirements.
    -   Prior to the instantiation of a new build environment, the SLSA Provenance

>     for the selected build image MUST be automatically verified.

Author: For now, we're implicitly defining the following simple policy: "Does the build image (via its hash) match my expectations (via its Provenance)"? We have an outstanding TODO to describe the verification process for all of the attestation types generated through this track, that will be in a separate doc. 

Beyond that, we're being very careful not to be overly prescriptive in the verification policies that SLSA users will ultimately define. We're not actually precluding an implementer of this track from bundling the build image and artifact Provenance attestations together (this is something in-toto readily supports), but because the build image isn't fully representative of the _instantiated_ build environment (e.g., because more components may be loaded at startup time, and each environment is uniquely identified by the build platform, even if it comes from the same base image), we can't simply treat the build environment as an input into the build.

>     for the selected build image MUST be automatically verified.

Author: Tracking in #1169

    A signed attestation to the result of the SLSA Provenance verification MUST
    be generated and distributed (e.g., via a [VSA]).

<dt>Benefits<dd>

Provides evidence that a build image was built from the advertised
source and build process.

</dl>

</section>
<section id="buildenv-l2">

### BuildEnv L2: Attested build environment instantiation

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

The build environment is measured and authenticated by the compute platform
upon instantiation, attesting to the integrity of the initial state
of the environment prior to executing a build.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

Organizations wanting to ensure that their build started from
a clean, known good state.

<dt>Requirements<dd>

All of [BuildEnv L1], plus:

-   Build Image Producer:
    -   Build images MUST be created via a SLSA [Build L3] or higher build
    process.
    -   MUST automatically generate and distribute signed reference values
    for the following build image components: bootloader or equivalent,

>     guest kernel, build agent, build executor, and root filesystem (e.g.,

Author: The intent for "root filesystem" is to be the `/` mount point. I suppose for windows environments, that would typically be `C:` ?

>     guest kernel, build agent, build executor, and root filesystem (e.g.,

Author: Resolving the second part of this comment via #1164.

>     guest kernel, build agent, build executor, and root filesystem (e.g.,

Author: Tracking the windows environment question in #1198

    via the image's SLSA Provenance, or [SCAI]).
    Additional build image components whose initial state is to be checked
    MAY be also measured.
    -   The running build environment MUST be capable of:
        -   Upon completion of the boot process: Automatically interfacing
        with the host interface to obtain a signed quote for the
        environment's initial state.
        -   Upon build dispatch: Automatically generating and distributing

>         a signed attestation that binds its boot process quote to the

Reviewer 2: The binding should be to the boot, build job description and build job outputs, no?

If the build environment is meant to be from a clean slate every time, then the job description and outputs can be measured to integrity registers. I'm unclear about build ID. Is this not an in-toto signing key? If it is, I'd expect to see the key only released after the build is complete, following a quote binding to a challenge to get the key released to the build environment to sign the in-toto attestation.

Author: The build hasn't executed at this point, so there are no build outputs to bind yet. The build ID is typically a unique opaque identifier generated by the build platform's control plane (e.g., GitHub's job ID), and is assigned to a build environment at dispatch time. We anticipate the build environment and build outputs will be indirectly bound via this build ID, which is included both in this "dispatch" quote and also in the resulting SLSA Build Provenance when the build completes.

What do you mean by build job outputs here? The return status, or the actual built artifacts. The former could certainly be easily measured into the integrity registers, the latter is more challenging in the case of very large built artifacts.

Reviewer 2: Build job outputs I'm just talking about the in-toto ResourceDescriptions of the built artifacts. The build integrity gets bound to the build environment integrity before permitting the signing of the build attestation as meeting a certain level. 

I'm misunderstanding the build ID and treating it as synonymous with the credentials to sign the build. Is there no SLSA-defined role for the build attester? I'm guessing the build agent will take on that role, but I haven't seen specific wording about signing. The RATS architecture would assign the role of Attester, I believe.

Even if the key is not released to the build environment itself and the in-toto attestation is meant to be signed remotely, either the key release request or the signing request that uses the L2-rated key ought to have measurements of both the build job description (measured before starting the build) and the build results description (the output resource descriptors) to permit use of the key. This can be accomplished with an appropriate attestation appraisal policy.

Both inputs and outputs get bound to the request to remove the need for a challenge, since there's nothing left to do if you replay in an attack environment. I don't think it's reasonable to require that the whole of the attestation request to the verification server gets stored. You just need an immutable label for the state of the appraisal policy (including the appraisal implementation provenance itself) and knowledge base of approved reference values.

Author: Got it. The build ID is not the Provenance signing key. The build ID is a random identifier that the control plane assigns to the build process. On GHA, for example, this is the 11-digit job number, whose primary purpose is to denote different runs of the same build process. The attestation signing credential is also issued by the control plane, but is typically mapped to the individual _user_ that triggered a build process, at least in the typical OIDC token-based PKI used by Sigstore and GHA.

To your point, SLSA doesn't currently follow the RATS architecture, so there isn't an explicit build attester role. Part of the reason for that is that the Build track doesn't even have a notion of an attested build at every level. 

> Both inputs and outputs get bound to the request to remove the need for a challenge, since there's nothing left to do if you replay in an attack environment. I don't think it's reasonable to require that the whole of the attestation request to the verification server gets stored. You just need an immutable label for the state of the appraisal policy (including the appraisal implementation provenance itself) and knowledge base of approved reference values.

Two thoughts here. First, I think it's definitely possible to make build environments less susceptible to replay attacks. It's actually something I've started thinking about for a while, and I think replay prevention needs to eventually become part of this BuildEnv track. 

Second, I agree that the ideal realization of attested builds would cover provenance for the appraisal  implementation, track the state of the appraisal policy, etc. as you suggest. I'll also say that handling policy is outside of the current scope of SLSA overall. If it's something that interests you, we do have an ongoing policy WG through the in-toto project where we're starting to look at exactly these kinds of problems. Please let me know if you'd like to get connect with that group.

Author: Tracking the various points raised in this thread in separate issues #1167 #1168 #1169

        assigned build ID (e.g., using [SCAI]).

-   Build Platform Requirements:
    -   MUST meet SLSA [Build L3] requirements.

>     -   Prior to dispatching a tenant's build to an instantiated environment,

Reviewer 2: You can verify a quote's signature without caring about the contents it measured. I think we need to say that the measurements in the quote are verified against the signed reference values provided by the build producer for the instantiated build image.

I'm interested in how you plan on identifying what a booted environment is as a whole to compare against its components. I don't think there is a commonly accepted mechanism for this.

expected initial state, even in the face of a build platform-level
adversary.

</dl>

</section>
<section id="buildenv-l3">

### BuildEnv L3: Hardware-attested build environment

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

The initial state of the build's host environment is measured
and autenticated by trusted hardware, attesting to the integrity
of the build environment's underlying compute stack prior to executing
a build.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

Organizations wanting strong assurances that their build ran on a good
known host environment.

<dt>Requirements<dd>

All of [BuildEnv L2], plus:

-   Build Image Producer:
    -   Upon completion of the boot process: The running build environment
    MUST be capable of automatically interfacing with the *trusted hardware*
    component to obtain a signed quote for the host interface's boot process
    quote and the environment's initial state.
    -   Upon build dispatch: The generated dispatch attestation MUST include
    the host interface's boot process quote.

-   Build Platform Requirements:
    -   Prior to dispatching a tenant's build to an instantiated environment,

>     the *host interface's* boot process quote MUST be automatically verified.

Reviewer 3: for GHA, i guess this would be the runner verifying the host's boot attestation before downloading any customer-generated payload?

Author: The short answer is no, it's not the runner performing the verification, it's the control plane of the CI platform.

Here's the general flow we're envisioning: 
1) The hypervisor (i.e., the host interface) boots up a new VM with some measured boot mechanism (commonly something like Secure Boot). This will generate a vTPM-signed attestation for the VM's boot process (plus, some extensions we introduce in this track), which the control plane retains for later verification.
2) When a new build request comes in, the control plane performs an authentication handshake with the build agent (not runner) in the VM. As part of this handshake, the agent will quote the vTPM again, and send the new attestation to the control plane.
3) The control plane will only dispatch a tenant's build into the VM if the content of the new quote matches the expected boot-time quote. 

I will caveat this by saying the intended audience for this doc is software developers/CISOs who need the broad strokes of the requirements. A separate "requirements" doc will specify the properties and protocols in greater detail for actual build or CI platforms looking to implement the track.

Author: Commit 209f139 should begin to address this. Tracking the greater details in #1169.

| Host interface | The component in the compute platform that the hosted build platform uses to request resources for deploying new build environments, i.e., the VMM/hypervisor or container orchestrator.
| Boot process | In the context of builds, the process of loading and executing the layers of firmware and/or software needed to start up a build environment on the host compute platform.
| Measurement | The cryptographic hash of some component or system state in the build environment, including software binaries, configuration, or initialized run-time data.
| Quote | (Virtual) hardware-signed data that contains one or more (virtual) hardware-generated measurements. Quotes may additionally include nonces for replay protection, firmware information, or other platform metadata.
| Reference value | A specific measurement used as the good known value for a given build environment component or state.

TODO: Disambiguate similar terms (e.g., image, build job, build runner)

### Build environment threats

TODO

## BuildEnv levels

The primary purpose of the Build Environment (BuildEnv) track is to enable

> [auditing] that a build was run in the expected execution context.

Reviewer: this link doesn't seem to work

Author: Thanks for catching this. I'll remove it since the page this is pointing to doesn't exist yet.

No requirements---L0 represents the lack of any sort of build environment
provenance.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

Development or test builds of software that are built and run on a local
machine, such as unit tests.

<dt>Requirements<dd>

n/a

<dt>Benefits<dd>

n/a

</dl>
</section>

<section id="buildenv-l1">

### BuildEnv L1: Signed build image provenance exists

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

The build image (i.e., VM or container image) used to instantiate the build
environment has SLSA provenance showing how the image was built.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

Build platforms and organizations wanting to ensure a baseline level of
integrity for build environments at the time of build image distrbution.

<dt>Requirements<dd>

-   Build Image Producer:
    -   MUST automatically generate SLSA [Build L2] or higher
    Provenance for created build images (i.e., VM or container images).
    -   MUST allow independent automatic verification of a build image's SLSA
    Provenance. If the build image artifact cannot be published, for example
    due to intellectual property concerns, an attestation asserting the
    expected hash value of the build image MUST be generated and distributed

>     instead (e.g., using [SCAI] or a [Release Attestation]). If the full

Reviewer: [Release attestation] link doesn't seem to work.

Author: Good catch, thanks!

---
title: Build Environment track
description: This page gives an overview of the SLSA Build Environment track and its levels, describing their security objectives and general requirements.
---

## Rationale

Today's hosted build platforms play a central role in an artifact's supply
chain. Whether it's a cloud-hosted service like GitHub Actions or an internal
enterprise CI/CD system, the build platform has a privileged level of access
to artifacts and sensitive operations during a build (e.g., access to

> producer secrets, provenance signing).

Author: Good point! We started using the term "hosted" mostly to stay consistent with the current spec, but are certainly not beholden to it if we eventually decide to use a different term. My current take (given our work on this track) is that "hosted" probably _is_ the right term, but that the current definition needs more context, so I'm definitely fine with using this track to help resolve #947. Happy to chime in on that issue to move things along.

> producer secrets, provenance signing).

Author: We're using the definition of build platform according to our current [build model](https://slsa.dev/spec/v1.0/terminology#build-model), which includes the infrastructure, to my understanding. What is the distinction between infrastructure and build platform you're drawing? Do you mean the compute platform, per the definition in this doc?

But perhaps we're interpreting the L3 requirements differently? My understanding based on the [Unforgeable](https://slsa.dev/spec/v1.0/requirements#provenance-unforgeable) requirement at L3 is that the build platform is trusted to handle these sensitive operations, but it must not be the case that the _tenant_/build itself can access the secrets and provenance signing.

> producer secrets, provenance signing).

Reviewer 8: Sounds good.

> producer secrets, provenance signing).

Reviewer 8: Ah, right. https://slsa.dev/spec/draft/terminology 

The build platform includes the control plane which is where this information resides.

> producer secrets, provenance signing).

Author: Tracking this in #1211

This central and privileged role makes hosted build platforms an attractive
target for supply chain attackers. But even with strong economic and
reputational incentives to mitigate these risks, it's very challenging to
implement fully secure build platforms because they are made up of many
layers of interconnected components and subsystems.

The SLSA Build Environment track aims to address these issues by making it
possible to validate the integrity and trace the provenance of core build
platform components.

## Track overview

The SLSA Build Environment (BuildEnv) track describes increasing levels of
integrity and trustworthiness of the <dfn>provenance</dfn> of a build's
execution context. In this track, provenance describes how a [build image]
was created, how the [hosted] build platform deployed a build image in its

> environment, and the compute platform they used.

Author: We are (as is the source track), and the reason is that SLSA Build Provenance is really well suited for describing a build process (inputs, outputs, build ID), but not other aspects about the state of a running environment. That is, we're really expanding what constitutes the full provenance of an artifact: SLSA Build Provenance + build environment provenance 
 (+ source provenance) etc. There already exist other metadata formats that _can_ describe some of those build environment attributes we want to validate (e.g., SCAI), so we're proposing to use those rather than change the Build Provenance format. 

Perhaps what this track needs is an [added definition](https://github.com/slsa-framework/slsa/blob/main/docs/spec/draft/source-requirements.md#definitions) and a [more detailed description](https://github.com/slsa-framework/slsa/blob/main/docs/spec/draft/source-requirements.md#communicating-source-levels) of what build environment provenance is, like the source track currently does?

> environment, and the compute platform they used.

Reviewer 8: > That is, we're really expanding what constitutes the full provenance of an artifact: SLSA Build Provenance + build environment provenance (+ source provenance) etc

I like something along these lines. While this isn't the first time, it is the first time that the repetition occurred to me. I'll follow up with a comment in #1010 as I think that issue is related as well.

> environment, and the compute platform they used.

Author: I think we can use #974 to track this. @arewm please let me know if you disagree.

| Track/Level   | Requirements | Focus | Trust Root
| ------------- | ------------ | ----- | ----------
| [BuildEnv L0] | (none)       | (n/a) | (n/a)
| [BuildEnv L1] | Signed build image provenance exists | Tampering during build image distribution | Signed build image provenance
| [BuildEnv L2] | Attested build environment instantiation | Tampering via the build platform's control plane | The compute platform's host interface
| [BuildEnv L3] | Hardware-attested build environment | Tampering via the compute platform's host interface | The compute platform's hardware

> :warning:

> > The Build Environment track currently requires a [hosted] build platform.

Author: Should we just get rid of L0? It's a no-op level anyway.

> > The Build Environment track currently requires a [hosted] build platform.

Reviewer 8: In https://slsa.dev/spec/v1.0/levels, we have L0. In https://slsa.dev/spec/v1.0/requirements we do not. This table more closely resembles the former so it makes sense to keep it for consistency.

> A future version of this track may generalize requirements to cover bare-metal
> build environments.

> :grey_exclamation:
> We may consider the addition of an L4 to the Build Environment track, which
> covers hardware-attested runtime integrity checking during a build.

> ### Build environment model

Author: I'd like to, I mostly was trying to leave all BuidEnv track related changes in one place until, but if we are relatively comfortable with these new definitions (though we may continue iterating over them), I'm happy to move them over in a dedicated PR.

> ### Build environment model

Author: Actually, I changed my mind. I'll move the terms to the terminology page in this PR.

> <p align="center"><img src="images/build-env-model.svg" alt="Model Build Environment"></p>

Author: Yes, we're tracking figure creation in #1165.

The Build Environment track expands upon the [build model] by explicitily
separating the *build image* and *compute platform* from the abstract build
environment and build platform.

A typical build environment will go through the following lifecycle:

1.  *Build image creation*: A build image producer creates different build
    images through a dedicated build process. For the SLSA Environment track,

>     the build image producer outputs provenance describing this process.

Author: Yes, this is just stating that the build image should itself have SLSA Build Provenance. The additional provenance formats come in at higher levels of the BuildEnv track.

>     the build image producer outputs provenance describing this process.

Reviewer 8: I think that we are in agreement then?
> the build image producer outputs provenance describing this process.

This describes the fact that the build image should have a SLSA build provenance attestation generated.

2.  *Build environment instantiation*: The hosted build platform calls

>     into the *host interface* to create a new instance of a build environment

Author: big +1. I think I'll handle this in a separate PR just to keep this one about the content.

>     into the *host interface* to create a new instance of a build environment

Author: Tracking this in #1177 .

    from a given build image. The *build agent* begins to wait for an incoming
    build dispatch. For the SLSA Environment track, the host interface in the
    compute platform attests to the integrity of the environment's *initial
    state* during its boot process.
3.  *Build dispatch*: When the tenant dispatches a new build, the hosted
    build platform assigns the build to a created build environment.
    For the SLSA Environment track, the build platform
    attests to the binding between a build environment and *build ID*.
4.  *Build execution*: Finally, the *build executor* running within the
    environment executes the tenant's build definition.

> ### Definitions

Author: Agreed, it'd be a little more reader-friendly if you could at least link to the individual definitions. I do think that adding the figure at the top will help a ton because then the reader would at least be able to visually see how the components fit (as [in the current build model[(https://slsa.dev/spec/v1.0/terminology#build-model)). But there are different levels of to these definitions too: some are components, and some are security mechanisms. Maybe we could split those up?

And in general, the terminology page may benefit from some re-organization between what are standard components and what are security/integrity mechanisms.

> ### Definitions

Author: I'll try to address this as part of #1177 .

The Build Environment track specifies the following supply chain components
and roles:

> | Primary Term | Description

Author: "Build environment" is already defined in the current build model, but this comment just enforces the need to move all of the terminology definitions in one place.

| --- | ---
| Build ID | An immutable identifier assigned uniquely to a specific execution of a tenant's build. In practice, the build ID may be a cryptographic key or other unique and immutable identfier (e.g., a UUID) associated with the build execution.

> | Build image | The template for a build environment, such as a VM or container image. Individual components of a build image include the root filesystem, pre-installed guest OS and packages, the build executor, and the build agent.

Author: The build image is the VM/disk image used to actually spin up a VM.

> | Build image producer | The party that creates and distributes build images. In practice, the build image producer may be the hosted build platform or a third party in a bring-your-own (BYO) build image setting.

Author: Which "party" are you referring to here? The new role of build image producer or the third party in the BYO case?

> | Build image producer | The party that creates and distributes build images. In practice, the build image producer may be the hosted build platform or a third party in a bring-your-own (BYO) build image setting.

Reviewer 8: The party that creates and distributes the build images. When related to the build track, I would assume that this is the producer, but the working seems like it is a specific build platform.

| Build executor | A platform-provided program dedicated to executing the tenant’s build definition, i.e., running the build, within the build environment. The build executor must be included in the build image's measurement.

> | Build agent | A program that interacts with the hosted build platform's control plane from within a running build environment. The build agent must be included in the build image's measurement.

Author: I think because we're assuming for the entire track that the build environment is running on a hosted build platform (as opposed to a bare metal/local builds), we do expect all environments to have a build agent in them. I'm happy to open a discussion issue for this expectation though, because it's very possible we're missing some important common use case here.

> | Build agent | A program that interacts with the hosted build platform's control plane from within a running build environment. The build agent must be included in the build image's measurement.

Author: CC @paveliak : Thoughts?

> | Build agent | A program that interacts with the hosted build platform's control plane from within a running build environment. The build agent must be included in the build image's measurement.

Reviewer 8: I duplicated this comment later: https://github.com/slsa-framework/slsa/pull/1115/files/4610a2c6f55458a35479c81c9e37bc1a2421d3c9#r1790448929

One use case that I am aware of is to provision a VM, copy scripts over, and then run them remotely (i.e. via ssh).

> | Build agent | A program that interacts with the hosted build platform's control plane from within a running build environment. The build agent must be included in the build image's measurement.

Author: Tracking this in #1185 .

| Build dispatch | The process of assigning a tenant's build to a pre-deployed build environment on a hosted build platform.
| Compute platform | The compute system and infrastructure underlying a build platform, i.e., the host system (hypervisor and/or OS) and hardware. In practice, the compute platform and the build platform may be managed by the same or distinct organizations.
| Host interface | The component in the compute platform that the hosted build platform uses to request resources for deploying new build environments, i.e., the VMM/hypervisor or container orchestrator.
| Boot process | In the context of builds, the process of loading and executing the layers of firmware and/or software needed to start up a build environment on the host compute platform.
| Measurement | The cryptographic hash of some component or system state in the build environment, including software binaries, configuration, or initialized run-time data.

> | Quote | (Virtual) hardware-signed data that contains one or more (virtual) hardware-generated measurements. Quotes may additionally include nonces for replay protection, firmware information, or other platform metadata.

Author: It is. The most "official" definition for "quote" I could think of is in section 9.5.3.1 in [this doc](https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf), which is TPM-specific, but the term is used by many other hardware-based approaches now as well.

> | Quote | (Virtual) hardware-signed data that contains one or more (virtual) hardware-generated measurements. Quotes may additionally include nonces for replay protection, firmware information, or other platform metadata.

Author: Just so I know whether this is resolved, would you like to see anything additional here? Should I add a link to the specification doc?

> | Quote | (Virtual) hardware-signed data that contains one or more (virtual) hardware-generated measurements. Quotes may additionally include nonces for replay protection, firmware information, or other platform metadata.

Reviewer 8: You can add a link. I went ahead and resolved the thread.

| Reference value | A specific measurement used as the good known value for a given build environment component or state.

TODO: Disambiguate similar terms (e.g., image, build job, build runner)

### Build environment threats

TODO

## BuildEnv levels

The primary purpose of the Build Environment (BuildEnv) track is to enable
auditing that a build was run in the expected execution context.

The lowest level only requires SLSA [Build L2] Provenance to

> exist for the build image, while higher levels provide increasing

Reviewer 8: I read this initially as build L2 for the artifacts being generated, not for the build image. I think that this is because I was looking for a connection/commentary on how the BuildEnv and Build tracks support each other. Should we explicitly state this somewhere?

Author: We're trying pretty hard not to introduce a circular dependency between the two tracks right now. So in the per-level requirements, we do state which Build track level the artifacts needs to be (via the build platform requirements), but the BuildEnv track doesn't currently support the Build track.

Reviewer 8: I don't think that we need to add a circular dependency. This track can depend on the build track, but the build track doesn't need to depend on the build environment track.

That doesn't mean that the build environment track cannot support increasing confidence in the isolation that the build platform claims.

Author: Tracking this in #1210

auditability of the build environment's properties and integrity of the
generated provenance attestations. The highest levels introduce further
requirements for hardware-assisted hardening aimed at reducing the trusted
computing base of a build.

Software producers and third-party auditors can check attestations generated
by the build image producer and build platform against the expected
properties for a given build environment. This enables any party to detect
[several classes] of supply chain threats originating in the build
environment.

As in the Build track, the exact implementation of this track is determined

> by the build platform provider, whether they are a commercial CI/CD service,

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
by the build platform provider, whether they are a commercial CI/CD service
```

or enterprise organization. While this track describes general minimum
requirements, this track does not dictate the following
implementation-specific details: the type of build environment, accepted

> attestation formats, the type of technologies used to meet L3/4 requirements,

Reviewer 8: This is BuildEnv L3/L4? Should we include L4 here since there is no L4 yet?

Author: Oh, this is a typo. We had an L4, but took it out because its focus wasn't clear to us. I'll fix this, thanks for catching this.

machine, such as unit tests.

<dt>Requirements<dd>

n/a

<dt>Benefits<dd>

n/a

</dl>
</section>

<section id="buildenv-l1">

### BuildEnv L1: Signed build image provenance exists

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

The build image (i.e., VM or container image) used to instantiate the build
environment has SLSA provenance showing how the image was built.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

Build platforms and organizations wanting to ensure a baseline level of
integrity for build environments at the time of build image distrbution.

<dt>Requirements<dd>

-   Build Image Producer:
    -   MUST automatically generate SLSA [Build L2] or higher
    Provenance for created build images (i.e., VM or container images).
    -   MUST allow independent automatic verification of a build image's SLSA
    Provenance. If the build image artifact cannot be published, for example
    due to intellectual property concerns, an attestation asserting the
    expected hash value of the build image MUST be generated and distributed
    instead (e.g., using [SCAI] or a [Release Attestation]). If the full
    Provenance document cannot be disclosed, a [VSA] asserting the build

>     image's SLSA Provenance MUST be distributed instead.

Reviewer 8: This makes a reference to a broader conversation that has been going on (i.e. claiming/proving/verifying SLSA for closed build environments). I feel like we should expose it in another location and just reference that here.

Author: I'm not sure I'm aware of this discussion, is there an issue tracking this?

Reviewer 8: #974 is at least one issue that I am aware of.

Author: I think the source track has started a pretty good discussion on this, we might want to eventually convert that section into its one page of the spec.

Reviewer: Added a note to https://github.com/slsa-framework/slsa/issues/1148#issuecomment-2411165979 to try and capture this.

Author: I tagged #974 issue to associate it with this track, so we're going to use that to track any related to discussion to this.

-   Build Platform:
    -   MUST meet SLSA [Build L2] requirements.
    -   Prior to the instantiation of a new build environment, the SLSA
    Provenance for the selected build image MUST be automatically verified.
    A signed attestation to the result of the SLSA Provenance verification

>     MUST be generated and distributed (e.g., via a [VSA]).

Reviewer 8: What is the subject for this attestation? The artifact produced? 

Does this mean that the build platform will need to:
1. Verify the provenance of the build image
2. Detect that an artifact has been produced
3. Produce an attestation on that artifact with the VSA (i.e. whether L2 is passed/failed)

Some questions that come up:
* Should this identity be different from that of the build platform or can it be the same?
* Why does the verification need to happen before instantiation? Can it instead be verified after the fact (i.e. using the image recorded in a Tekton Chains-generated provenance if an immutable reference is used)?

Reviewer 3: > SLSA Provenance verification MUST be generated and distributed

This is a VSA'd VSA! 
Neat. 

In practice, I wonder if it would typically be a mega VSA that checks provenance on the entire SBOM and the build image.

Author: It could be a VSA'd VSA :D Or a regular SLSA -> VSA step, depending on what's available from the build image producer. 

> What is the subject for this attestation? The artifact produced?

I'm expecting the subject for this attestation will be the same as the subject for the _verified_ SLSA Provenance, i.e., the build image that us being instantiated.

> Why does the verification need to happen before instantiation? 

We want to be able to ensure that a build _won't_ run in a problematic/unexpected/compromised environment before the build runs, rather than detect issues with the build image used to spin up the VM/container after the fact.

Reviewer 8: I don't see any need to have a VSA'd VSA. One could simply produce multiple VSAs as well.

> We want to be able to ensure that a build won't run in a problematic/unexpected/compromised environment before the build runs, rather than detect issues with the build image used to spin up the VM/container after the fact.

Is this not just an implementation detail? We want to know whether an artifact was built in an environment provisioned by a SLSA conformant build image. It doesn't matter whether this verification happens before instantiation or after as long as we can trust the post-verification to be able to determine the suitability of the build environment. 

This would, of course, likely be harder to do for verifying the environment of the trusted control plane. Are there any common tools/processes that can perform this verification AND generate the VSA before instantiation?

Author: I'm tracking this as part of #1169

<dt>Benefits<dd>

Provides evidence that a build image was built from the advertised
source and build process.

</dl>

</section>
<section id="buildenv-l2">

> ### BuildEnv L2: Attested build environment instantiation

Reviewer 8: Starting with this level, it seems like the criteria are very different for VMs and containers. They were grouped previously for simplicity, but would it make sense to separate them here as the amount of mutually relevant information is smaller?

Containers do still have some infrastructure behind them (i.e. VMs/nodes running the containers/pods). How do those requirements apply to that infrastructure?

Author: You raise a really valid point. I think we need to think more carefully about the different requirements for containers vs VMs. I'll open up an issue to track this.

Author: Tracking this in #1192

    process.
    -   MUST automatically generate and distribute signed reference values
    for the following build image components: bootloader or equivalent,
    guest kernel, build agent, build executor, and root filesystem (e.g.,
    via the image's SLSA Provenance, or [SCAI]).
    Additional build image components whose initial state is to be checked
    MAY be also measured.
    -   The build agent MUST be capable of:
        -   Upon completion of the boot process: Automatically interfacing
        with the host interface to obtain and transmit a signed quote for the
        build environment's system state.
        -   Upon build dispatch: Automatically generating and distributing
        a signed attestation that binds its boot process quote to the
        assigned build ID (e.g., using [SCAI]).

-   Build Platform Requirements:
    -   MUST meet SLSA [Build L3] requirements.
    -   Prior to dispatching a tenant's build to an instantiated environment,
    a signed quote MUST be automatically requested from the build agent,
    and the contained measurements verified against their boot process
    reference values. A signed attestation to the result of the verification

>     MUST be generated and distributed (e.g., via a [VSA]).

Reviewer 8: Are you saying that there must be an agent? This might not always be the case. 

If a workload is pushed to a VM via SSH (i.e. a build script), would the agent be the ssh daemon or some process invoked in the build script?

Author: Tracking this in #1185

    -   The host interface MUST validate the measurements of the build image
    components against their signed references values during the build
    environment's boot process.
    In a VM-based environment, this MUST be achieved by enabling a process
    like [Secure Boot], or equivalent, in the hypervisor.
    For container-based environments, the container orchestrator MAY need
    modifications to perform these checks.[^1]
    -   Prior to instantiating a new build environment, the host interface
    MUST automatically verify the SLSA Provenance for the selected build
    image. A signed attestation to the verification of the build image's
    SLSA Provenance MUST be automatically generated and distributed (e.g.,
    via a [VSA]).

<dt>Benefits<dd>

Provides evidence that a build environment deployed by a hosted build
platform was instantiated from the expected build image and is at the
expected initial state, even in the face of a build platform-level
adversary.

</dl>

</section>
<section id="buildenv-l3">

### BuildEnv L3: Hardware-attested build environment

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

The initial state of the build's host environment is measured

> and autenticated by trusted hardware, attesting to the integrity

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
and authenticated by trusted hardware, attesting to the integrity
```
